[WIP] RFC: Question Sets (#2080)
PrairieLearn/PrairieLearn: rfcs/0000-shareable-courses.md

In the future, one could build a feature that allows an authorized user to export a copy of a shareable course for use with local development.

## Safety guarantees

The following guarantees should exist:

* There is no ambiguity between whether a question belongs to a course or an external shareable course.
* Syncing a new version of a shareable course should not break any existing assessments that reference questions from it.
* There should never be an assessment on a production instance that references a question that does not exist.

The following facts and behaviors ensure those guarantees:

* A leading `@` in a question ID in an assessment definition will unambiguously differentiate shareable course questions from course-local questions.

* Once a course has been designated as shareable, it must remain shareable. That is, once a course with `"shareable": true` is synced to an instance of PrairieLearn, attempting to sync the same course with `"shareable": false` will be a sync error.

> * Once a question in a shareable course has been synced to an instance of PrairieLearn, attempting to perform a sync where the question would be renamed or deleted will be a sync error. *(Is there any special consideration necessary for local development?)*

Reviewer: I think that in local development all of these safety guarantees should be disabled, so that you can rename new questions before pushing them to production.

> * Once a question in a shareable course has been synced to an instance of PrairieLearn, attempting to perform a sync where the question would be renamed or deleted will be a sync error. *(Is there any special consideration necessary for local development?)*

Reviewer: Should we add a notion of question aliases? That is, alternative QIDs for a question specified in the `info.json` file which can also be used to reference this question. In this case, the sync rule might be that renames are allowed, but only if the old name is still listed as an alias.

The in-browser editor could add an alias automatically whenever renaming questions in a shareable course.

# Drawbacks

## Inability to configure or augment questions

With this proposed solution, there isn't an obvious way to control the behavior of a given question, such as adjusting the difficulty level or adjusting units/tolerances based on the needs of a particular course. There's also no way to augment questions, such as by providing additional instructions for a given question.

It's unclear if either of these features would be needed in practice. However, it's worth calling them out to be aware of the limitations. These constraints might actually prove useful by encouraging sensible defaults and ensuring that questions are self-contained so that additional instructions/context aren't needed.

# Alternatives

## No formal support for sharing questions

This is the current state of PrairieLearn. "Sharing" a question involves manually copying all of its files from one course to another. From a technical perspective, this solution is simple, as it requires no special treatment in PrairieLearn code. However, it scales poorly as it requires a lot of manual action to propagage question enhancements or fixes.

## Share questions directly from courses

> Instead of having a special entity that stores shared questions, one could share questions directly from an existing course. From a technical perspective this is likely easier than the proposal of dedicated shareable courses.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Instead of having a special flag to indicate a shareable course, one could share questions directly from any existing course. From a technical perspective this is slightly easier than the proposal of dedicated shareable courses.
```

# Potential future enhancements

The following features are not necessary for an MVP version of this feature, but are called out for the sake of discussion.

## Question deprecation

To ensure safety guarantees, once a question in a shareable course exists, it cannot be renamed or deleted. However, as shareable courses eveolve over the course of many years, certain questions may become outdated or broken and there may not be sufficient resources to update them. To make it easy for this to be communicated to consumers of questions, a "deprecated" flag could be added to a question's `info.json` file:

```json
{
  "uuid": "754dac56-fc1f-4888-a74a-1b365fd48376",
  "deprecated": true
}
```

Deprecated questions could render a warning in instructor views of the question, on a question's row in an assessment overview, or in other useful locations across PrairieLearn.

# Unresolved questions and concerns

> 
> ## Feature name
> 
> With the existence of assessment sets, "set" might become too much of an overloaded term if used for this feature. A name like "question collections" may be more appropriate.
> 

Reviewer: I think this subsection can be deleted, now that we've changed to calling this a "shareable" course.

```suggestion

```

## Shareable course IDs

Shareable course IDs are how questions from shareable courses are referenced in assessments. Ideally, these IDs should have the following properties:

* Static (do not change over time)
* Consistent across instances of PrairieLearn
* Human-readable

Because they must be human readable, a shareable course's UUID is unsuitable as the user-facing course ID. The `name` value in `infoCourse.json` could be repurposed for this, but it should have additional restrictions (no spaces) and has a different semantic meaning. A new `id` value could be introduced that has no meaning in standard courses.

## Access control within a PrairieLearn instance

As with normal courses, access to shareable courses should be carefully controlled. It should also be consistent: if I'm staff for a course instance, I should be able to access shareable courses that are referenced by my courses' assignments. It's not clear how this access should be requested, granted, or managed.

> These permissions should likely not live in a shareable courses's repo - they're liekly going to be specific to the instance of PrairieLearn a course is running on.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These permissions should likely not live in a shareable courses's repo - they're likely going to be specific to the instance of PrairieLearn a course is running on.
```
